#summary Discuss proposed changes here

== What needs to change? ==

The biggest limitation of the format at the moment is that only two update schemes are supported: the von Neumann neighborhood and the Moore neighborhood. While these are the most popular by far, a useful CA rule format must support a wide range of options. In the future we would like to support:
  * the Margolus neighborhood and other partitioning schemes
  * triangular and hexagonal lattices
  * 3-dimensional CA, 1-dimensional CA, etc.
It's not obvious how to support all of these different possibilities. XML is obviously a possibility but makes reading files harder than it need to be. Please get in touch if you have any suggestions!

To avoid bloating the format, we must be careful not to include too much. Some things we *don't* want are:
  * world specifications: size, wrap-around, etc.
  * display parameters: color, icons, etc.
These things will vary with each implementation and belong elsewhere.

== Format proposals: ==

  * RoadMap : an overview of things we might support
  * PermutationSymmetry
  * Calcyman's suggestions for other neighbourhoods: GenericNeighborhoods
  * UnboundVariables
  * MargolusNeighborhood
  * HexagonalNeighborhood

== Website issues: ==

=== Golly access point: ===

I've added a new file in the source repository: golly-archive.html in http://code.google.com/p/ruletablerepository/source/browse/trunk/

This is intended to be Golly's access point for its Online Archives feature, whereby users can browse around the internet safely for patterns and rule tables to click on. We will need to fill it with all the links to the content available here (zip files, mainly), in a nice readable look.

Are we happy with that living in the source repository? It's a bit of a misfit, but I can't think of a better way. We could have it as a download file, but then updating it is a pain - you need to manually delete the old file before uploading the new version else it errors out (you can't overwrite in situ), and you have to type the description and specify the labels afresh each time. And we can't use a wiki page as the access point, as Golly needs the .html. 

If you aren't able to access the source repository yourself, then edit the html file and email it to me. I will need:
  # the html file
  # a short comment (1 line) summary of what you changed, so we can track the changes.

--TJH