#summary Explanation of partial construction

= Introduction =

Holistic self-replication is the familar concept where a machine constructs a copy of itself. More specifically, the child machine is entirely constructed by the parent machine. William R. Buckley has devised an alternative form of self-replication, where the child machine assists in its own construction.



= Details =

The parent machine constructs a seed, or 'zygote', which is itself incapable of self-replication. The zygote then 'grows' extra organs, which are dedicated to tasks such as tape-copying and rewinding. Partial construction is of interest because it more closely represents the devlopment of multi-cellular eukaryotic life. Holistic self-replication is closer to that of prokaryotes and protoctists.

Both Buckley and Adam P. Goucher have made working examples of partial constructors:

== Buckley's partial constructor ==

William R. Buckley's partial constructor is very regular, and is based on a replicator that requires no signal crossing organs. The zygote begins with a tape-reading head, a construction arm and a single 'stage'. The machine then constructs the remaining stages, which are necessary for tape replication and other functions. It is implemented in von Neumann's original ruleset, and is considerably large.

== Goucher's partial constructor ==

Adam P. Goucher sacrificed the regularity of Buckley's machine in order to reduce the size and replication time of the machine. His machine is implemented in [Nobili32], and replicates roughly 800 times faster than Buckley's original partial constructor.




== Kinematic partial construction ==

Partial Construction is not restricted to formal and biological systems. Researchers at Cornell University have built a mechanical self-assembler. It doesn't actually synthesise its component parts; it merely assembles them to produce another robot. Nevertheless, it could be used as a basis for a self-replicator. The description is available at this [http://www.physorg.com/news4055.html news article].

 
The fact that the daughter machine assists in its own construction makes it a valid partial constructor, even though it is a very trivial example of one. You can watch it in action by viewing this [http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gZwTcLeelAY video].